---
layout: post
title: "Increase student engagement in Technology Leadership course"
author:
- Duy Dang-Pham
meta: "OENG1130 Technology Leadership"
image: /assets/img/blog_9May_1.jpg
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!-- excerpt -->
---
In this semester 2, 2020, I am teaching a third-year course in the Bachelor of Engineering (Software Engineering) program called OENG1130 Technology Leadership. The first assignment of this course requires students to analyze the current issues of a technology company (students can flexibly pick the company), compare and discuss at least two leadership approaches, and provide recommendations related to the leadership approaches to address the identified issues. The first part of the assignment is a three-page research paper, and the second part involves delivering a 10-minute oral presentation about the research paper. <!-- excerpt --> 

To increase student engagement and active learning, an incentive was provided: students were encouraged to ask a maximum of four meaningful questions about their classmates' presentation, in order to receive a maximum of 4 extra marks out of 20 marks (i.e., the total marks of the presentation component). A question is considered as meaningful if it challenges the student presenter's ideas annd arguments provided during their presentation, as opposed to questions that ask to clarify concepts or request for examples. My role as a facilitator of the presentation sessions involved keeping the time and intervening when the students' questions/answers were unclear, or when they got stuck in a debate/discussion.

The effect of this incentive was positive, as each presentation received on average three meaningful questions from the audience. Most questions were thoughtful and interesting, and student presenters admitted that they had never thought about some of the points raised in these questions. The Q&As also provided the opportunities for the presenters to improve their abilities to think and respond quickly to the questions.

Some take-aways:
- Foster students' interactions with each other when and where possible
- Create an atmosphere where students can confidently ask questions and challenge each other's ideas
- Incentivize interactions if needed
- Students' interactions might be more effective and suitable for oral presentations as compared to peer-reviewing written reports